>> Hey, Jody. >> Hey, how are you?
>> Awesome to have you here on YouTube. And just in a second on the podcast. Everyone out
there who's watching, please put comments and thoughts in the live chat, and we'll try
to make those part of the show. With that, Jody, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
>> Thank you. I am so thrilled to be on the show.
>> I'm so thrilled to have you on the show. I've been a fan of your work for a while,
and we got a chance to get to know each other
at this year's PyCon.
And so now here you are on the podcast as well.
Welcome.
- Yeah, thank you.
We had some very nice Mexican food actually,
or maybe Utah Mexican.
I don't know quite how I would interpret it.
It was very good though.
- It was very good, yeah.
The food was excellent.
I thought the parties were great at the conference
and people who are maybe still holding out on going
I think personally, I really enjoyed being there. So happy.
I would say I think it's probably the best conference that I go to yearly.
And it's like the vibe is so nice. Yeah, it really is. Now, on this show,
we're going to talk about how data scientists, you're one of them, how data scientists use Python,
which is somewhat different than maybe a software developer.
We have, which I guess I'll put myself solidly into that camp.
I do a bunch of web development, make APIs, I build apps and ship them.
That's quite a different story.
And I'm going to have a, I think we have a really great time
talking about those things.
But before we do, let's get a little, get to know you a bit.
How'd you get into programming, Python, data science?
- Yeah, so probably going hand in hand with maybe not being a developer.
My story is perhaps a little unconventional.
So my background is academic, like a lot of data scientists.
And unsurprisingly, the first language that I learned
was R because I was doing psychology and health sciences
and a lot of statistics.
And I was procrastinating once during my PhD.
You will find any excuse to not work on your thesis.
And I think I was reading, oh, you know,
people who are into statistics,
you should really learn Python, it's the future.
I was like, I should learn Python. So I sat down and because I really don't want to write that next chapter. I just exactly exactly
Um, so I remember it like I actually had this long weekend and I worked my way through I think it was um
Zed Shaw's learn Python the hard way. This is showing my age, I think and um
I loved it. Like I completed the course in three days
And then I didn't know what to do with Python because the stats libraries weren't as developed back then
So I just put it aside for a couple of years and ended up picking it up again when I started
working in industry, because obviously I've left academia. And you sort of fairly quickly,
once you start in data science, move away from more sort of statistical stuff to machine learning.
And Python really has the libraries for that. So yeah, that's my journey. It's a little bit
bibs and bobs and stops and starts. But once I kind of picked up Python, it really was love
at first sight. Oh, that's excellent. What's your PhD in? Computer science, of course,
right? Of course, of course. You know, it's so funny. You are the third person to ask me
in two weeks and no one has asked me this question for like two years. My PhD was in hurt feelings.
Hurt feelings? Yeah. Okay. I say this a little bit blithely. So my PhD being in psychology,
I was really interested in emotions research and relationships research.
So I kind of wanted to see what happens to people emotionally
when close relationships go bad.
And it's hurt feelings like things like,
you know, infidelities, rejections, all of that.
So I was just studying what generates like and
regulates the intensity of hurt and studied that for four and a half years.
- Yeah, sounds interesting.
I'm sure there was a lot of data to process.
- There was a lot of data to process
and a lot of very interesting statistics.
So that was sort of how I got into data science.
I fell in love with stats in undergrad
and just kept going down that path.
- I think a lot of people are drawn to data science
not with the intent of waking up one day
and saying, "I'm gonna be a data scientist,"
but they're excited or inspired
about something tangential
and they're like, well, I really need to get something
better than Excel to work on this, right?
- Absolutely, yeah, yeah.
And we'll probably talk about this a little bit later
about why data scientists use programming.
And it kind of is like in some ways
that need to jump from something way more powerful
and reproducible than Excel.
- Yeah, yeah, for sure.
So how about now?
You said you've left academics.
What are you doing these days?
Yeah, so that leap from academia was a long time ago now.
I think that was like seven years, again, showing my age.
So for six of those years, I was a data scientist.
So day-to-day was pretty varied,
but the job I have now is very different.
So I currently work as a developer advocate at JetBrains.
And the way I would describe my job is,
I'm a liaison between data scientists and JetBrains.
So I try and advocate for our tools
to be as good as they can be.
And I try to recommend ways that people can use our tools
if I think it's useful,
but I'm definitely not marketing or sales.
It's more, if I think this is the right fit for you,
I'll do it.
So it's like the way I achieve that is really up to me.
For me, I really kind of,
I like to do a mixture of what I call internal and external activities.
So external activities are actually kind of only tangentially related to the
products. So this would be an example of an external activity.
It's just getting out there and educating people about data science or educating
data scientists about technical topics, things like conference talks or webinars,
you know, all this sort of stuff.
And then internal stuff is more focused on maybe things a bit more related to the
product. So if I think there's a feature that people would be really interested in, I
might make a video about it or create a blog post.
So, yeah, it's a real hodgepodge.
So this week, for example, I've been working on actually a
materials for a free workshop that they're organizing at EuroPython.
So I'm going to be volunteering to help out that.
It's completely unrelated to anything I'm doing at JetBrains.
It's just a volunteer activity.
But last week I was at a conference, week before that.
So you can see the jobs pretty varied.
- I think developer evangelists,
it seems like such a fun job.
I had your colleague, Paul Everett,
on and we actually talked,
it's quite a while ago, a couple of years ago,
three, four years,
and we had a whole episode on,
like a panel on what is the developer advocate,
developer relations job.
But it just seems like such a great mix of,
you still get to travel a little bit, see people,
but you also get to write code
and work on influencing technology and products and stuff.
- Yeah, and I think the thing that I started to appreciate
about the job a few months in is,
you have a platform with this job,
and that means you can choose to promote the message
that you want.
And a message that, no surprise, is very meaningful for me
is data science is for everyone.
Like I hate the gatekeeping
that can happen in tech communities.
I think it's quite bad in terms of like
people being intimidated by math in data science.
And like, I'm here to say to you,
if you want it, it's for you.
It is a very cool field.
And yeah, it doesn't matter what background you come from.
- I absolutely agree.
And I was kind of hinting at that saying like
a lot of people who don't see themselves
as developers or programmers,
like still find really great places,
really great fits in data science and in programming as well.
And I also want to second that I don't think
you really need that much math.
Maybe if you're trying to build
the next machine learning model platform,
then yes, okay.
But that's not what most people do.
They take the data, they clean it up,
they do interesting visualizations
and maybe put it into some framework for production, right?
Yeah. And the nice thing is the field is in such a point where you have so many
frameworks or tools that will handle a lot of this stuff for you.
Like, I'm not saying you don't need any understanding of what's going on under the hood, but
you can learn it incrementally.
And a lot of it is like with software development, where you develop that that smell or
that instinct for when something is not right.
That will benefit you more than, you know, knowing how backpropagation
works from a calculus perspective,
like that stuff is maybe a bit too much.
You don't necessarily need it.
- Yeah, well, let's get into the main topic
and talk a little bit about, you know,
how does programming in Python differ
on the data science side than say,
you know, me as somebody who builds web apps.
- Yeah, and maybe we can start by doing an orientation
to like, what does a data scientist do?
'Cause I think this confuses a lot of people.
Yeah, yeah.
So basically the role of a data scientist is to sort of like,
like the reason you would hire a data scientist is you have a bunch of data and
you have an instinct that you can use that data to either improve your internal
processes or sell some sort of IP.
So the reason, you know,
we differ from BI analysts is BI analysts are doing analysis,
but it's more about business as usual, which is really important.
You absolutely need BI analysts.
How are sales going?
How much have we made versus last year?
Like those kinds of charts, right?
Like absolutely fundamental questions.
Um, so you need to be an analyst before you need a data scientist, but your data
scientists are more there to push the envelope in a data driven way.
So we have two main outputs.
I would say you can either create an analysis and do a report, or you can build
some sort of model that will go into production.
So an example might be as a business, I have an instinct that I can get my customers to
buy more things based on people like them also buying those things.
So in that case, your data scientists might be able to build you a recommendation engine
and this, you know, will have a business outcome.
Developers obviously, on the other hand, have a very different goal.
Their goal is to create robust software systems.
So the concerns that they have are things like latency, server load, downtime, things
like that.
And it's very interesting.
And we'll talk about it a bit more when we talk about code, if we kind of get into that
topic.
But basically, data scientists are not really interested in creating code for the long term,
whereas the code becomes the product that software developers write often.
you have to think about things like legacy systems,
because eventually every Greenfield project
becomes a legacy system if it lasts for long enough.
- Yeah, if you're lucky, right?
Because the alternative is it never really got used
or it didn't add that much value
and got discarded, shut down, all right.
So even though people talk about
how much they don't want legacy code
or how they kind of don't necessarily wanna work on it
'cause they wanna work on something new and shiny,
That's kind of the success side of software development, right?
Yep, exactly.
I do think it's super interesting, the different life cycle of code on the data science side,
because you might be just looking to explore a concept or understand an idea better and not
necessarily ever intend to put it into production in the traditional software sense, right?
So I've seen some pretty interesting code written
that people would look at and go,
oh my goodness, what is,
there's not even a function here.
How is this possible?
You know, it's like copy and paste reuse almost.
And yet it really does go from having no idea
to pictures and understanding,
and then maybe handing that off potentially
to be written more robustly and better.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, exactly.
And it's really interesting.
Like, they're kind of two very different processes.
And that point actually where engineering
and research meets is a very, very interesting one.
And I've seen it work in multiple different ways
in multiple different workplaces.
So for example, I've worked in places
where the data scientists were completely sequestered
away from the engineers.
And they really wouldn't be that much discussion between the engineers and the data
scientists during the research phase, which I do not advise.
So what that means is the data scientists will come at the end and hand over this
chunk of perhaps very difficult to read
code to an engineer and be like, hey, so we need to implement this.
And the engineer is like, what is this?
OK, I will schedule that for the next six months.
And then I've seen, you know, or I've been a data scientist embedded within a software development team.
And in that case, your project is marching in lockstep with what the engineers are doing.
And from the very start, you know, you've been discussing important things like, you know, maybe you need to build a model that has latency constraints.
You need to think about this as the data scientist in terms of like the model that you run, but also how it's implemented.
So yeah.
Right.
Like how much memory does it use?
Cause if you run it on your own machine by yourself, then, well, it's kind of the
limit of your computer sort of sometimes, but if you're running a thousand of them
concurrently, cause people are interacting at the website all of a sudden that might
make a difference.
Exactly.
Um, or like one of the most interesting problems I think I ever solved in my career
was basically I was working at a job board.
We were trying to improve the search using natural language processing.
So we had this idea that we could build a model
that found out the probabilistic relations
between skills and job titles.
So if someone typed a skill into the search,
we could expand it with job titles
and then find all of the jobs that we indexed with that
at search time and vice versa with job titles and skills.
But the thing is we need to find those relations
at search time.
Like that is a very low latency system.
And it was super interesting
because we had to think about how we could search
that vector space in really, really quickly.
Like instead of having to calculate the distance
between that and every single vector,
we had to work out how to do that more efficiently.
And that sort of stuff I really like
because it's so applied and it's so,
like it's this really nice intersection
between computer science and data science, I think.
It's super cool.
- That is neat.
One of the things I really like about working
with programming broadly is how concrete it is, right?
You came from academics,
you know, I was in grad school for a while as well.
And it's, you could debate on and on
about a certain idea or concept.
And it's like, well, you might be right.
Or I'm here, you push a button and you get the answer
or it runs or like, there's a really nice feedback
of like, I built this thing and it's,
look, it's really connecting these people.
And, you know, then it comes down to,
Can you do it in real time and other things like that?
But that's a really cool aspect of programming.
- Yeah, and I think it's kind of a shame
that a lot of places do set up their engineering
and data science teams so separately.
Sure, we have quite different roles
and we have quite different backgrounds sometimes.
But I really think that having the two teams
at least planning things together,
you can really actually learn a lot from each other
about how to approach problems.
Yeah.
- Well, when you were describing,
either having those groups really separated
or working really closely together,
maybe a analogous relationship
that people could relate with
is maybe front end developers
and people building the APIs in the backend, right?
Like the people doing React or Angular or Vue
or whatever it is, you know, in the web design,
Having those completely separated as well is also terrible.
Not a good idea.
- It doesn't make any sense.
And I can totally understand it from the point of view
of team composition, because it is, I think,
better to have all your data scientists together
because they can learn from each other.
But then I think having, I don't want to use the squad term
'cause I know it's become a little bit unpopular to use it,
but this idea of project-oriented teams,
I think are quite important.
Yeah.
So,
I guess maybe let's dive a little bit more
into the research side of things
that I wanna ask you about, why Python?
But, you know, let's talk about
how the research process works
and maybe why that results in different priorities
and styles of code and styles of engineering.
- Yeah, so I think it starts at a similar point to,
you know, all software projects,
which is business comes to you and they have some sort of goal.
Sometimes it's very vague and you need to interpret that and turn it into an
executable project.
But where the sort of uncertainty starts and like where it sort of becomes a
research project rather than a project.
I don't know if I described that very well,
but it becomes research versus something you're building concretely is
you don't even know at the start of a research project, whether it's even possible to answer the question that you're being asked or build the internal product that you're being asked for.
So you might not understand the domain entirely right.
You're trying to gain understanding even.
Yeah. And like in the very worst cases, you won't even know if you have the data because maybe your company has so much data and it's so poorly organized.
Again, something I've seen that you don't even know if the data exists to answer this question.
So first is going and getting your data.
And you spend quite a lot of time with the data because the data will be the one that
tells you the story. It'll tell you whether what you even want is possible.
And you probably like heard data scientists hammering on about, you know, garbage in,
garbage out. Like you can build the most beautiful, sophisticated model you want.
But if you have crap data where there's no signal.
You're not going to get anything because it's just not there.
like the relationship you're looking for is not there.
Yeah, the side of that I've heard is 80% of the work is actually the data
cleanup, data wrangling, data gathering before you just
magically hit it with a plot or something, right?
Absolutely, and it's interesting because that
data cleaning, data wrangling step also doesn't happen in one go,
especially if you're building a model. So what will happen is you'll try
something out and you'll be like, okay it didn't quite work,
maybe I need to manipulate the data in a different way, or I need to create this new variable.
And then you'll go again. And it's this super iterative process where you have this
tightly coupled relationship between both the models and the data. So it really is sort of,
you know, how I was talking about the instinct. This is sort of where that comes in, because
you're going to spend like 80% of your time honing your skills. But it's the most, I think,
valuable part of the process. And if the signal's there, you can usually get away with using
really dumb and simple models. Things that are unfashionable now, like decision trees or linear
regression, you can get away with them because you've just got such good data that just go with
a simpler model. It's got all the advantages. So yeah, this is sort of, I think what makes
it different that you're sort of moving towards a goal, but you don't know what that goal is.
Estimation is always hard, right? What I found is best is really just timeboxing each step,
seeing if you are up to where you thought you'd be up to by a certain point. And if not,
you need to just keep having those discussions with the business stakeholders because
otherwise they're going to not be very happy if you've spent six months just looking at something
and you have nothing.
- What have you built?
Well, I have some notebooks I can show you.
- I have 40,000 notebooks and they're all terrible.
- Yeah.
Speaking of data, Diego on the audience
has an interesting question.
How big are the data sets businesses
will bring to you typically?
Enough that you don't need to go out and find more data.
- Yeah, this is a good question.
So I hate to be, it depends, you know.
I get to say that though, because, you know, I was a lead data scientist, so I earned that
rank.
It really does depend on the problem you need to solve.
So typically, business will have enough data to cover at least some of the use cases.
So to give you a really concrete example, this job board that I was talking about that
I worked at, we actually had like a bunch of different job boards across Europe.
So we had some that were a lot bigger like Germany or the UK, and we had some that were
really small like Poland or Spain.
And we wanted to build these multi-language models or models maybe for different languages.
We played around with both.
And I don't think we really had enough data to support the models in these smaller languages.
So the models were just not as good quality because we didn't have enough data.
But for the bigger languages we did.
And then it sort of becomes a case of, okay, well, we have more data for these particular
websites because they're the most, like, they're the ones that are bringing the most revenue.
So then it sort of became like, well, okay, maybe it's good enough that we improve the
search on the most important ones.
And for the smaller ones, we just wait until we accumulate more data.
So yeah, most of the time I found that there's a way to make it work for at least part of
the solution.
And then sometimes, like in the case of my last job, we had something like 170 billion
auctions per day. So we had so much data, we even had problems processing it.
That's the other side of the story is when you've got too much and then how do you throw it away?
You've got this auction story. Another one that comes to mind is the Large Hadron Collider.
They've got layers and layers of chips on hardware and then
Chips or machines right next to the the collectors and then on it where it's all about. How do we throw away?
You know terabytes of data down to get it to megabytes
per second, right?
yeah, and it's interesting because what you can end up in this within those situations is
Even then you can have underrepresented groups. So for example, we had we're working with advertisers and
apps, you know, basically trading ads and
We ended up with some apps that were just so small that you were like even with all this data
I really don't have enough to represent this particular combination in this country. So
Yeah, yeah
Interesting very interesting so
Why python
You know, you started out in r and of course any distraction from writing a phd is it's a good distraction
but I I do think
there's been a really interesting sort of graph.
Like if people go and look at,
what is it, Stack Overflow Insights.
If you go look at Stack Overflow Insights,
they had a really great, is this the right one?
No, it's the survey.
They have a really great, not their survey,
graph that shows you, I don't know where to find it live,
but a really graph that shows you the popularity
of Python over time.
And there's just this huge inflection point around 2012.
And I feel like that's when a lot of the data science
libraries really came around and took off.
So it seems like there was a big inflection at one point,
but why?
- Yeah, so to be honest,
I can talk about why I like Python from my background.
I couldn't really tell you exactly what caused that takeoff, but, you know,
apart from, you know, this idea that the libraries were maturing enough.
The thing is looking even at current surveys,
around 60% of data scientists do not have a software development or a software
engineering background. So for people like us,
we don't really understand, like it sounds terrible.
We don't really understand basic constructs in how a programming language works.
And that can actually mean that going to some sort of compiled language even can be quite
a steep learning curve.
Sure.
Pointers to pointers, for example.
Like, no, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Or, I don't know, having to deal with the fact that in Java, everything is a class.
You're just like, what is this?
It's like, but of course you understand why if you have that background.
But if you're trying to learn it yourself, you then have a lot of background you need
to cover.
But in Python and in R as well, you don't need to cover those things.
It's super easy to prototype.
It's super easy to script.
The flexibility of Python is what makes it, I think, the perfect prototyping language.
And that's essentially what you're doing.
You're prototyping.
So we talked a little bit earlier about like, why not just Excel?
We didn't quite say that, but this was sort of what we were maybe getting at.
And yeah, we could do some of our work in Excel.
I have tried this.
And first I can tell you Excel really starts to struggle when you have too many calculations
going on under the hood.
Gets very, very slow.
But to be honest, it's just cleaner to code this sort of logic.
It's much more reproducible when you need to do this iterative sort of stuff.
And it also means that you can use much more powerful tools.
So you can say use APIs that developers have made to process your data.
You can use powerful-
Or get data, right?
Like I need live currency conversion data, right?
So much easier than Excel.
Yes, yes, yes, exactly. Like you can like scrape data or you can, yeah, pull data in
off an API, or you can use powerful tools like Spark to process 170 billion auctions
per day in order to reduce it down to something manageable. So yeah, it just gives you a lot
more power. But at the same time, why we use programming languages is like, it's just such
a different focus. So we, it's a bit overkill to use something like Java. I know some people do
do natural language processing in Java, but that's more on the engineering side to build
maintainable systems. - One of the things I like to say when thinking about how people who are
coming from a tangential interest like biology or whatever, is you can be really effective with
Python and I suspect R as well with a really partial understanding of what Python is and what
it does. Right? Like you pointed out, you don't even have to know what a class is or even really
how to create a function. You just, I can put these six magical incantations in a file and then
I can do way more than I otherwise could, right? Then you learn more, you make it better and better
as you kind of gain experience. >> Pretty much. And this is where I started. Like, obviously,
I learned what functions and classes were when I first started programming. But in the end,
maybe it's not the best thing and we can sort of maybe get into this. I suppose part of the
confusion or not confusion, but internal debate I've had over the years is how good does data
science code really need to be? How much would data scientists benefit from knowing more about
computer science topics or software engineering topics, maybe more to the point.
And, you know, because like the thing is, every field has so much to learn.
Don't even get started on what's happening with large language models at the moment. Like,
it's just overwhelming. Should we take some of our precious time and learn
software engineering concepts? I'm not sure. Like, I'm not sure if I have the answer to that.
I think it really depends on what kind of data scientists you are. If what you are is
is someone doing research, as you described before,
and you're like, do we, is there a trend
between the type of device that they use
to buy their thing at our store
and how much they're buying on the second,
you know, how much are likely they'll come back?
Like if they're using an iPhone,
do they tend to spend more
than if they're using an Android?
And is that a thing that we should consider?
Or, you know, is there any, like that kind of exploration,
you can judge whether or not you should make that exploration.
But just put that aside for a minute.
That kind of stuff, like once you know that answer,
maybe you don't need to run that code again.
Maybe you don't care.
You just want to kind of discover if there is a trend.
And there, maybe you need to know software engineering techniques,
but should you be writing unit tests for that?
I'd say maybe not, honestly.
On the other hand, if your job is to create a model that's
going to go into production, that's going to run behind a Flask
or FastAPI endpoints, then you're kind of in the realm of
continuously running for many people over a long time.
And I think that really is a different situation.
Yeah.
Like, I think this is where you actually move from data science to machine
learning engineering.
Um, this term has a lot of different definitions.
Um, for me, I base my definition of ML engineers on the two people that I've
worked with who were like true full stack kind of
people who could go from, you know, research and prototyping
through to deployment.
And they were data scientists who really cared
enough to actually learn how to do proper engineering and they could
actually deploy their own things.
But then this leads to another one of my very favourite topics, which is who is
responsible for apps in production?
And here's the thing.
So I think as good as your data scientist is going to be or your ML engineer, let's say an ML
engineer, let's say that they can actually deploy their own code.
If they're then responsible for that code in production.
That then eats up the time that they can be prototyping and researching new things for
you. So the conclusion I've come to over time, and again, this is a matter
a debate. This is just my opinion. Basically, I think if your company is above any sort of level
of size or complexity in terms of the data products it has, I think you really do need
dedicated data science and engineering teams. Because in the end, no matter how good your data
scientist code is going to be, it needs to be implemented by the person who's going to maintain
it. And maybe they're not the ones writing the code from scratch. Maybe they can adapt the data
a scientist code if it's good enough.
But in the end, they need to be comfortable and familiar enough with that code to be
like, yeah, if I get pinged at three in the morning, I'm OK knowing what to do with
this code.
Yeah. So I think it's just easier to scale these teams in parallel rather than trying to
hire this like all in one person who can do everything.
They're impossible to hire.
Like I've only ever met two over the course of my career and quickly they become
overwhelmed by having to maintain projects.
Right, is that the best use of their time? Yeah, and like it's
maybe it's not necessarily even if it's the best use of their time.
It's more like then who's going to do your research?
Because now you've used up that resource on maintaining
two or three projects. Right, absolutely. Chris May's got an interesting question
out here in the audience. This kind of turns us on its head a little bit. It
says development teams tend to work better when they focus on writing and
or factoring code to make it testable and understandable.
And we've talked a little bit about maybe stuff
that data scientists shouldn't care about or whatever.
So are there ideas that are like good practices
for data scientists and teams of them?
- Yeah, this is actually a really great question.
So basically it's an interesting thing with data scientists
that unlike software developers,
we often tend to work alone on projects
or maybe in very, very small teams,
like maybe two or three people.
And I think it's probably a hangover
from the fact a lot of us are ex-academics.
We're just used to having, like, it's not great.
(laughing)
But it's sort of-
- A whiteboard, an office in the corner,
and no one knows what you're doing.
- Exactly, and no one cares.
That paper that three people read took me three years.
So what I think has been neglected, you know, aside from
learning, you know, software engineering best practices is more fundamental things,
which is like writing maintainable code.
And I don't mean maintainable in the sense of it's a system that needs to be able
to run regularly.
It's more like this is a piece of code that I can come back to in six months and
understand what I was doing because, you know, research projects can be shelved
forever, but maybe they need to be revisited and built upon.
So this was actually a topic I got really interested when I first moved to
industry, like this idea of reproducibility with data science projects.
It's about the code, but it's also about things like dependency management, which
is notoriously difficult in Python to get
reproducible environments later.
And even the operating system, right?
If Linux has really dramatically changed over time,
then maybe your old dependency, you want to keep that one,
but it won't run on the new operating system
or there's a whole spectrum of challenges there.
- Exactly, exactly.
And it's sort of something that can be solved
with maybe using poetry, which is a little bit more robust,
but even then, you've still got it,
like the it runs on my machine effect
where your machine will not be the same machine.
Increasingly, there's actually a move towards doing more sort of cloud-based stuff for data science, which solves a few of these problems.
And it also solves the additional problem where data scientists often need to do remote development for various reasons, like you need access to GPUs in order to train models.
So, you know, obviously, if you have a server, you have a Docker container which has environment specifications, you can power up that exact same environment.
And that actually helps with that reproducibility a lot.
And then another point which I think is really important for data scientists and can be neglected is literate programming.
So this is an idea from Donald Knuth, and it's this idea that you should write your code in such a way that it's actually understandable later.
With data science work, it's also that you really need to document a lot of the implicit
kind of assumptions that you make or decisions that you make as part of the research process.
And this is one of the reasons, probably a good segue, why Jupyter is so important.
Jupyter notebooks are designed to be research documents.
So this is why you have the markdown cells if you've seen a Jupyter notebook, because
It's this idea that you really, really need to document, along with the code, the decisions that you made.
Like, why did you choose this sample?
Why did you decide to create the inputs to your models the way that you did it?
You need to document all this stuff.
So, yeah, reproducibility is a super interesting topic.
And I think it's something that really needs to be thought about carefully, even if you're not collaborating with anyone else.
because otherwise your piece of research is going to be worthless in three months because you're not going to remember what you did.
I think notebooks are quite interesting. They go a long ways to solving that when
when used in the right way, you can just jam a bunch of non-understandable stuff in there and it's just
well now it's not understandable, but it's in a web page instead of in an editor, but yeah
I think as in
You know not just programmers but tech in general we're just bad at
thinking about the long-term life cycle of information and compute. For example, I got a
new heat pump to replace the furnace at my house. The manual for it came on a CD drive, and I'm like,
"What? I don't think I have a CD. Where did I put that? I would go dig through
a closet full of electronics. I'm not sure I can read that." And CDs seem so ubiquitous for so long,
And just simple little mismatches like that just get worse over time.
And it's going to be tough to keep some of this older research and reproducibility around.
Yeah, it's super interesting that there are packages I used to use, you know, back when I
first started in natural language processing. Some of them haven't been updated from Python 2.
So I can't use them anymore. Because they were just some, probably like a PhD project and no
one really had the time or energy to maintain it after that person graduated.
Right. And the person graduated, got a job and doesn't really care that much anymore,
potentially. Not enough to keep it going. Yeah. It's not even necessarily their fault. It's just
life. Let's talk about some of the libraries and tools. You mentioned Jupyter. I think Jupyter is
one of the absolute cornerstones. But Jupiter or Jupiter Lab? What are your thoughts?
Yeah, so it's funny actually for years I was just working in Jupiter, playing Jupiter on my computer.
Maybe give people a quick summary of the difference just so.
Yes, yes, very good idea. So basically Jupiter is, I suppose you could call it an editor,
It's basically an interactive document which you run against a Python kernel, or you can run it
against different language kernels. There are R, there are Julia, there are Kotlin notebooks.
Should I give my little advertisement for JetBrains? So basically what you can do is you can
run code in cell blocks, then you can also create markdown cells in between them,
and this allows you to basically have markdown chunks and then cell chunks. JupyterLab
is hosted remotely. So you have basically a bunch of other functionality built in so you can open
terminals, you can create scripts, things like that. But basically it's like a little Jupyter
ecosystem which is designed to be remotely hosted and it can be accessed simultaneously
by several people. So I would say Jupyter is good if you are just starting out and you're
you're dealing with small data sets,
maybe you're even retrieving things from databases,
but you're not saving anything, you know,
too heavy locally, you're not, you know,
using a huge amount of memory,
like maybe unless you got one of those new M2 Macs
and, you know, server in your office, so go for it.
- Exactly.
- Yeah.
JupyterLab, I think is good.
It basically, you need to access different types of machines.
So maybe you need to be able to access GPU machines easily.
You kind of want that remote first experience
where you don't have to then connect to a remote machine.
And I have found JupyterLab helpful in the past for sharing,
but the thing you can't do with JupyterLab
is real-time collaboration.
And that's a bit of a pain in the butt.
Obviously, since I started at JetBrains,
I kind of, you know, like I'm using our tools
and I like them a lot.
- Yeah, I was gonna ask, is this PyCharm, Dataspell?
When you actually do that,
Are you using some of those type of tools?
- Yeah, I am.
So I won't turn this into too much of an advertisement
for our tools,
because it's not really the point of me being here.
But we've kind of tried,
or my teams have tried to solve some of these problems
that you might have with just using plain Jupyter notebooks
or even working with JupyterLab,
maybe a bit more like robustly.
So we have actually three data science projects, products.
We have PyCharm and Dataspell, which you've mentioned.
They're desktop IDEs with the ability
to connect to remote machines,
but they're not really collaborative,
but they do give you like, you know,
really like nice experience with using Jupyter,
debugging and co-completion and all those sort of things.
We have another one, which is DataLore.
And this falls into those managed notebooks
that I was talking about.
that's cloud hosted.
And the nice thing about data law actually is you can do real time collaboration.
So it sort of helps overcome...
Google Cloud style, sort of.
Yes, it's the same technology, actually.
So, yeah, so it's kind of a very interesting thing, because there will be times where,
you know, maybe you're not working on a project with a data scientist, but you need them to
have a look at your work.
And when I was working with JupyterLab, what we would do is we would clone the notebook
to our own folder and then we were in the same environment.
So it was okay.
But then you would rerun the whole thing again.
And sometimes it would be pretty time consuming.
Data lore is an alternative to that,
may or may not be kind of your style,
but it's pretty cool because you can actually
just invite someone to the same notebook instance
that you're in and you're basically hosting them
and they have access to everything that you've already run.
So it's like true kind of real time.
- That's nice, because sometimes it has,
a cell has to run for 30 minutes,
but then it has this nice little answer
and you can work with that afterwards, right?
- Exactly, or you want a model to be available
and maybe you haven't saved it or something like,
yeah, like this is just a way around
some of these friction points.
- Yeah, absolutely.
I wanna circle back just really quickly
for a testimony, I guess, out in the audience.
Michael says, "I started teaching basic Git, Docker,
and Python packaging to bioinformatics students at UCLA,
and it's made a huge difference in the handoff."
And I think for actual projects,
I just think, as we were talking about
what should people learn at data science
and what they shouldn't, yeah,
a little bit of the fluency with some of these tools
is really helpful.
- I absolutely agree.
Like I know it can be really overwhelming, especially Git, initially for students who...
- Git is overwhelming.
- Yeah.
Yeah.
I would say I'm...
Because I tend to end up thinking by myself.
Yeah, yeah.
But this sort of falls into the reproducibility stuff that I was talking about earlier.
And it's super, super important.
Like, and once you get comfortable with like just basic use of these tools, you can get really far.
- Yeah.
Okay, back to some of the tools, Jupyter, JupyterLab.
What about JupyterLite? Have you played with JupyterLite?
Only a teeny tiny bit because of this workshop that I'm going to be helping out with at
EuroPython. So they're going to be running the whole thing in JupyterLite, hopefully.
A couple of bugs to solve, but I think they're overcomable.
But yeah, it's a really interesting alternative to Google Colab, actually.
Yeah, JupyterLite, take Pyodide, which is CPython running a WebAssembly,
and then build a bunch of the data science libraries like Matplotlib and stuff in WebAssembly.
And then the benefit is you don't need a complex server to handle the compute and run arbitrary
Python code, which is a little sketchy. You just run it on the front end in WebAssembly,
which is pretty cool.
I interviewed the folks at PySport a little while ago.
And it's just the ability to just take your code
and run all these-- if I go to the right spot--
go and run all these different pieces on your front end
without worrying about a server, I think, is super cool.
Not if I get that right or not.
But anyway, I think running it on top of people using it, on top of the browsers like you do
JavaScript is an interesting thing to throw into the mix for notebooks.
>> Yeah, and I think actually a lot of these projects coming out using Pyodide are really
interesting. Obviously, PyScript is the big one from last year.
>> Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, I think PyScript actually has really lots of interesting
possibilities beyond just the data science side, right? Whereas Pyodad is a little more focused on just
I think really providing the data science tools on the client side
So we'll see we'll see where PyScript goes if they can they can make an equivalent of
Vue.js or something like that where people can start building
Legitimate
Front-end interactive web apps like, you know, like airbnb or google maps or something
but with Python, that's gonna unlock something
that has been locked away for a really long time.
With Pyodide, that's like a nine or 10 meg download.
That's too much for the front end,
just for like a public facing site generally
at the start of time,
but they're moving it to MicroPython as an option.
And that's a couple hundred K,
which is like these other front end frameworks.
So it's very exciting.
I think that's gonna be,
that's definitely the most exciting thing in that area.
But all right, back to data science, let's see.
Where do you wanna go next?
You want to talk pandas maybe?
- Yeah, let's jump into pandas,
which is the other biggie
when you're talking about data science.
So what pandas is really important for is,
it's basically the entry point
of you working with your data.
So it's a library,
which basically allows you to work with data frames.
Data frames are basically tables.
And from there, you can do data manipulation,
you can explore your data and visualize it.
And it also is an entry point to passing your data into models.
Sometimes it'll need additional transformations, but say scikit-learn,
which we can talk about in a sec, you can basically pass, you know,
pandas data frames directly into scikit-learn models.
Pandas also, because of its popularity,
it's kind of opened up this easy access to like grid
computing and other types of processing database stuff
that you don't really need to learn those tools,
but you get to take advantage of.
And so two things that come to mind for me are Dask.
- Yes.
- Right?
It's kind of like a Panda's code,
but instead you can say,
actually run this across this cluster of machines
or larger than memory or stuff on my personal computer,
or even just take advantage of all 10 cores on my M2
instead of the one.
- Yes.
Yeah.
- Have you done anything with Dask?
Are you a fan of it?
- The thing was, so Dask,
I was kind of there when Dask was new
and let's just say they find out a lot of the bugs.
So what ended up happening
was I ended up learning PySpark instead.
So I went down a different kind of route,
but I think they solve very similar problems.
It's just Dask is much more similar to Pandas.
And so you don't really need to deal with learning.
It's similar, but it's a new API.
- Yeah, another one that I was thinking of,
I just had these guys on the show, sort of, is Ponder.
- Oh, I have not heard of this.
- So Ponder, they were at startup row at PyCon
and they basically build on top of Moden,
which is important, moden.pandas as PD.
And what it does is it, instead of pulling all the data back
and executing the commands on your machine in memory,
which maybe that data transfer is huge,
it actually runs it inside of Postgres and other data,
and I think PySpark as well.
Like it translates all these pandas commands
to SQL commands to run inside the database
where the data is, which is also a pretty interesting thing.
- That is amazing.
So yeah, it's just interpreting the code
in a completely different way.
you can do like query planning and optimize.
- Yeah, exactly.
They said that df.describe is like 300 lines of SQL.
It's really, really tough.
But once this thing writes it, then it's good to go.
And I think the reason I bring this up is like,
you don't have to write that code.
You just have to know pandas.
And then all of a sudden there's these libraries
that'll do either grid computing
or really complex SQL queries that you don't care about.
You don't care to write or so on.
So I think it's pandas is interesting on its own,
but it's almost like a gateway to the broader data science community.
Agreed. Agreed. And it's such a de facto,
I think for data analysis now or data manipulation transformation.
Yeah. Like I don't see it going away anytime soon.
And actually pandas 2.0 just came out and instead of being,
yeah, instead of pandas is numpy under the hood,
which is fast, but it's not really equipped to deal
with certain kinds of structures like strings,
because it's not really what NumPy is about.
And also missing values,
the way that it handles that is pretty janky.
So yeah, it's been rewritten with PyArrow under the hood.
And yeah, apparently the performance is so much better.
So something I need to sit down and actually try,
it's been out for like a month
and I'm feeling a bit bad, but yeah.
- Yeah, that's cool.
It probably has support for some of the serialization
formats for back to let it, lack of a better term,
like I said, parquet and some of those types of things.
I think that comes straight out of PyAero.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
- Excellent.
So that kind of brings me to a trade-off
I wanted to talk to you about before we get off of Pandas
is, you know, although it sounds like Pandas 2.0,
it makes this less important, but you know,
Another sort of competitor that came out is Polars,
which is a data framing library for Python written in Rust.
Many of the things are written in Rust these days
when they care about performance.
It's like a big trend.
It's the new C extensions of Python.
But this one is supposed to also be way faster
than Pandas 1, and I think it's also based on PyArrow,
amongst other things.
but the details are not super important.
More what I wanted to ask you is like,
well, here's another way.
This is a totally different API.
It doesn't try to be compatible.
So you got to learn it.
So the question is, as a data scientist,
as a data science team leader,
how should you think about,
do we keep chasing the shiny new thing
or do we stick with stuff that one,
people know like pandas,
but two also extends into this broader space
as a gateway, as we described.
Like, what are your thoughts here?
- Yeah, like this is a super interesting question.
So data scientists in some ways have the luxury
of being able to maybe use newer packages faster,
because we build these small kind of atomic projects
that we can just update to the next library
that we feel like using in the next project.
And maybe we're the only ones who ever look at that code.
So it's cool.
The problem is though, of course,
is if someone else needs to look at your code,
they are gonna need to be able to read it,
which is not maybe the biggest problem.
The biggest problem of course is any new library.
You have less documentation
and you have less entries on stack overflows.
So I would say you need to make a trade-off
between the time you're not only gonna spend learning it,
but also debugging it, 'cause it's gonna be slower,
that you ChatGPT doesn't know much about polars.
Basically, you're essentially going to need
to trade that off against,
are you gonna see a benefit from that?
So do you actually have problems
with processing your data fast enough?
If you're working on small data sets, probably not.
If you're not, then maybe try something pandas
or pandas adjacent.
- Yeah, yeah, that sort of community support side
is important.
I'm pretty sure there are a lot of data scientists out there
who are the one data scientist at their organization.
And so it's not like,
oh, we'll go ask the other expert down the hall
because if it's not you, there's no answer, right?
- Exactly, exactly.
I do think though, like, again, it's good to be curious.
It's good to try out new things as well.
And again, part of being a data scientist
is you can experiment a bit more, so.
- Yeah.
You know, 2017, 18, sort of the peak Python 2 versus 3
tension, I guess, maybe one year before then.
I noticed that the data scientists were like,
I don't know what y'all are arguing about.
We're done with this.
What we're arguing about is,
when can we take the Python 2 code out
to absolutely 100% drop support for it,
not when are we moving over?
Whereas people running that Django site
been around for eight years that's still on Python 2. They're starting to get nervous because they
don't want to rewrite it because it works but they know they're going to have to. And I feel like
the, you know, we talked about the legacy code is sort of the success story that is dreaded of
software on the computer science side. Because that it's less of a thing in data science,
it's easier to go, well this next project that we're starting in a couple months, we can start
with newer tools. Yep and I actually remember the point where I decided okay this is the last
project I'm doing into because the thing that was keeping me into was actually one of those
libraries that I mentioned which you know built by a university and I was like you know what I'm
just going to go find some alternative tool. I think at that time Spacey which is a very well
known NLP library, actually, based here in Berlin.
Yeah, exactly.
Basically a neighbor of yours.
That's right.
But I think Spacey was really getting off its feet in that time.
So I was like, you know what, I'm just going to switch over to this new library and try
that and it's excellent.
So I didn't look back.
Yeah, Spacey's cool.
Ines Montani is doing really great work and everyone over at Explosion AI.
- I mean, that's the thing.
Sometimes it seems like a hassle, right?
But if it forces you out of your comfort zone
to pick stuff that's being actively developed,
maybe it's worth it, right?
- Exactly.
- All right, we're getting short on time.
So you wanna give us a lightning round
and the other important libraries
you think data scientists should pay attention to?
- Yeah, so let's just quickly go
through the visualization side of things.
So visualization is massive.
So matplotlib is really the biggie
and it's what a lot of libraries
actually built on top of in Python.
So the syntax is not that friendly.
So there's a lot of alternatives.
So Seaborn is a very popular one.
We actually have an internal one called Let's Plot,
which is a port of ggplot2.
And there's another one called Plot9.
And I think there actually may even be one called ggplot.
- Some of the fancy new ones that people hear about,
they're actually internally just controlling
Matplotlib in a cleaner API, right?
- Pretty much, and let me tell you,
Matplotlib needs a clean API, it's a bit,
let's say, archaic.
- Give it some props for its XKCD graph style.
I mean, that is pretty cool that you can get it to do that.
- I actually have done,
I've done XKCD graphs in Python as well.
It's very, yeah, it's very,
let's say it's a goal that you aim for
to do like elite visualizations.
- Yeah, well, you know, it's fun
and XKCD is amazing in a lot of ways.
However, I think it also can serve an important role
when you're presenting to like leaders of an organization,
non-technical people, 'cause if they look
and see a beautiful, pristine production already,
sort of like, we're done.
You don't know, this is the product, no, we're done.
Look, you look, you already got it.
But if it comes out and sort of cartoony,
kind of like wireframing for UI design,
you're like, oh, there are no expectations it's done.
It's XKCD.
We're gonna get you the real graphs later, right?
That's, there might be some value there.
- Like a psychological effect where you make it look
like a hand-drawn prototype.
- Exactly, it looks just hand-drawn, it's barely done.
- That's right.
- And it's really just theme equals.
- It just didn't take me two days.
- Scikit-learn, you mentioned that before.
- Yes, so there are a whole bunch of libraries
for doing machine learning.
So I could learn is kind of your all in one
for classic machine learning,
but then you have this whole other branch of data science
which is around neural nets or deep learning.
So you have Keras, you have TensorFlow,
you have PyTorch, and then you have a package
for working with a lot of like these generative AI models
or large language models called Transformers
from a company called Hugging Face.
So all of these are actually super accessible.
I wouldn't say TensorFlow and PyTorch can be tricky,
but Keras is like a friendly front end for them.
And actually, if anyone is interested
in getting into this side of things,
there's a book called "Deep Learning in Python"
by a AI researcher at Google called Francois Chollet.
- Yeah, it is actually, I think,
the most popular book ever on Manning.
So it's an amazing book.
I can only recommend it.
And it's very gentle for beginners
who have no background in the area.
- Okay, yeah, cool.
I'll put that in the show notes.
- Awesome.
- Yeah.
All right, well, there are many other things
we can talk about.
Maybe just let's close this out
with a quick shout out to your PyCon talk.
Eventually, someday, I'm sure that the talks
for PyCon will be on YouTube.
They were last year, but I looked back
and I was so excited near the end of the conference.
I'm like, look, the talks are up.
And I was talking to someone like, look, here's your talk.
They're like, no, that's my talk from last year.
I'm like, oh, yeah.
So it was maybe three or four months delayed
I feel it actually came out to maybe this midsummer,
or the video of Virginia talk will be out,
but maybe just give people a quick elevator pitch
of your talk here.
- Yeah, so I decided to give this talk
because I kind of had to learn things the hard way
in terms of performance with Python.
So basically I used to do everything with loops
and then I had to start working with larger amounts of data
and it just doesn't scale.
So over time, as I got better with Python,
I learned more about NumPy,
which is another important data science library.
And it basically allows you to do
what's called vectorized operations.
So in this talk, I basically talk about like the math,
but what behind why vectorized operations work.
You don't need any math background to understand it.
It's very gentle.
And then just show like why some of these operations work
in NumPy and how you can, you know,
implement it yourself to get like really like massive gains in performance speed.
Yeah, that's incredible.
Move a lot of that stuff down into like a C or a rust layer and just let it do its
magic instead of looping in Python.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
Very cool.
So I don't know when, but eventually this will be out as a video people can check out
from you now.
They know to go look for it.
Yeah.
I think the port team is still recovering.
So much work.
I know.
I know it.
All right, well, Jody, it's been great to have you
on the show.
Before you get out of here, final two questions.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor are you using these days?
- So I'm actually using all three that I talked about.
I use PyCharm if I need to do something
like a bit more on the engineering side,
which is not that often for me.
Dataspel if I'm doing sort of very local development
and doing more of the research side.
And then if I need some GPUs, I'm using Datalore.
So a bit boring, but using all of our tools
and I really like them.
- Yeah, they are good.
All right.
And then notable PyPI package,
something you wanna give a shout out to,
or if you prefer a conda package,
there's a lot of intersection here.
- Yeah, I think my favorite package
at the moment is Transformers.
It is amazing.
And the documentation that Hugging Face have put together
is so good.
just the work they're doing in open data science is so, so important.
So, like big props to Hugging Face.
We should really support the work that they're doing.
Excellent.
All right.
Well, thanks for being on the show and sharing your experience.
Thank you so much for having me.
I had an absolute blast.
Yeah, same.
Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]